[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Voices from the inside out.
Interviews, a different
kind of talk television.
>> She calls it the new
American spirituality,
and she should know.
Her name is Elizabeth Lesser,
and for the last 23 years,
she's been a driving force
behind the Omega Institute, one
of this country's
leading teaching centers
for human development
and spiritual growth.
Her work has given her
the rare opportunity
to learn and teach
beside great healers,
like Ram Dass and
Pir Vilayat Khan.
>> I was in my early 20s
when I started Omega,
and a bunch of us were actually
living in one of those typical
late 60s, early 70s commune
with a meditation teacher.
And we had this wonderful
parade of teachers
coming from all over the
country, all over the world,
teaching us different
aspects of living
a healthy spiritual life.
And we had the idea,
maybe other people
who don't want to actually
live what we're living
would like to learn some
of what we're doing.
We had no idea that
once we started Omega,
so many people
would be interested.
>> Elizabeth, I'm so, so pleased
to sit down and talk with you.
Not the least of many
reasons is to tell you
how much I loved your book,
The New American Spirituality.
>> Thank you.
>> There's a reason--
and I didn't realize this
till halfway through the book,
by the way--
that it's called the New
American Spirituality.
Is it because Americans as
a whole, America as a place,
hasn't really had
its own spirituality,
that over the years
we've begun to gather it
from the Sufis, the
Indians, the Chinese?
>> Yeah, there's several
things about the spirituality
we're seeing in our culture
now that I think are American.
First of all, Americans
are so individualistic.
We've now had a couple hundred
years for the American psyche
to congeal.
And the most telling
part about being American
is I vote for what I want.
I know what I want.
And I'm going to go after it.
Just because my
parents were plumbers
doesn't mean I'm
going to be a plumber.
And I am fully an individual.
>> It's almost like you are
a cartographer of our souls.
And I wonder why
now more than ever
you think it is
that we need that.
Everybody I gave the book to
said, it's just what I needed.
Why do we need
this guide so much?
>> Well, as Americans-- and
that's why I titled the book
"The New American
Spirituality"--
as Americans, our lives are so
fast-paced and so disjointed.
And the center has dropped
out of a lot of people's lives
as we run from one work
thing to family thing
to leisure time
filling every moment.
And most of us don't
have a chance just
to stop and to drop down into
the part of ourselves that
is quiet and peaceful.
And there there's a
great hunger for anything
that will remind us hey,
there's something more.
Your life has meaning and depth.
And the pain and confusion
you feel, there is an answer.
But you gotta slow
down to find it.
>> I think a lot of people
have that I call it a hole
in your soul, that feeling
that you're talking about,
that hunger.
And I think now that
people have identified it--
and before, by the way,
I think they didn't.
It was just what's this?
What's going on?
How do you think they begin to
fill the hole in their soul?
How do they do that?
>> Well, I think you pointed
out the most important thing--
identifying it.
And I think the reason we're
beginning to just beginning
to identify it is we've
gone to the end of a time
in our culture where
we were still filling
and we were thinking this
prosperity, this mobility,
this ability to define
myself in the material world
is going to bring me the
pain relief I'm looking for.
It's going to fill the
God-shaped hole in myself.
And it's taken a while for
it to show up that yes, it
fills some wonderful things.
I mean, some of our
prosperity and our goods
are gifts, marvelous gifts.
I'm not at all belittling
American culture completely.
But the parts that can't
be filled by material
are just beginning to show up.
So identifying it and being
brave enough to identify it,
that's really the first and
biggest step on the path.
>> That's an interesting
thing to say--
to be brave enough.
What do we do when
we're not brave enough?
Do we say, well,
I'll take a Valium?
>> We say, I'll take a Valium.
I'll spend two
extra hours at work
so I don't have to
go home and feel
how out-of-joint things are
with my wife or my husband
or my kids.
I'll go to the gym.
I'll take that second vacation.
Therefore, I have to
work harder to get there,
running toward always
something that we
think is going to bring us
meaning and peace of mind.
Whereas stopping after
we've been running so hard,
often we feel like we're getting
hit by years of not having
dealt, not having looked,
not having stopped
to feel something's missing.
I feel-- I'm in pain.
My level of intimacy with my
friends is just not happening.
Whatever it is
that's deeply off,
it's easier sometimes
to keep running.
>> Is it not astonishing to
you as a follower and a teacher
and a student of this for so
many years how many people
there are in pain, the
number of people in pain?
>> Well, I think human beings
have always been in pain.
Way back when the Buddha
was teaching and preaching,
the first noble truth of
Buddhism is life is suffering.
There is suffering in life.
We don't want to sink and
accept that a big part of life
is suffering.
So we paddle as
fast as we can away
from the first noble truth,
which is life in this realm,
in this human realm,
is full of pain.
And so much of the pedaling
away from our spiritual center
is pretending we're
not in pain, putting
on a face to our friends and our
people at work, our colleagues.
I'm fine.
I'm great.
My life works.
And then oh, his life works.
Her life works.
Well, mine doesn't.
OK, I'll pretend even more.
And we're in this masquerade
ball together where I'm fine,
I'm fine.
And none of us are fine.
We all suffer.
>> I'd be so curious to know
why and how you begin your own
search.
If what you say is
true about all of us,
it had to begin with pain.
What was your pain that made
you say, I gotta look at this?
>> Well, I was one
of those children,
one of those little children
at four or five years old,
I'd lie in bed, not really
afraid of monsters under
the bed but of death.
I was plagued by fear of
death and the great void
and where would I go
after my body died.
Since I can
remember, I would say
that was the number
one propelling
pain that made me a seeker
at a very early age.
By the time I was
15, 16, I was already
looking for spiritual
teachings, that pain
being the fear of
death, which I think
is at the base of
most of our fears
and most of our pain,
our sense of how
groundless our existence is
here, how much things change,
ultimately.
>> Every second.
>> The big change.
>> And then little deaths as I
think are our crises and pains
are in life, little deaths began
to accumulate as I got older.
Divorce was a major
propelling force
in my life to seek even deeper.
>> I think divorce is such
a huge issue in America.
And I don't know-- maybe
I'll get letters on this--
but I think it's so
difficult for women
because women feel
like they failed.
I think men tend to go on.
And women feel like
they've failed.
So people would be
most interested to hear
you talk about what happened
when Elizabeth Lesser, one
of the founders of the Omega
Institute, known for love
and searching and connecting and
communicating, gets divorced.
Were you guilty?
What went on inside you?
>> Everything.
All of the above.
It was the great dark
night of my soul.
The great Christian
mystic Saint John
of the Cross talks about how
every seeker needs and comes
to a dark night of the
soul where everything you
know and you think
about yourself crashes.
And you're left just
you and the universe.
And you pick up the
pieces and start again.
That's what divorce was
for me because I was so
identified with myself
as a mother and a wife.
Even though I had this career
that was so fascinating and so
important, my main identity
was to me in my heart of hearts
a mother and a wife.
And I think maybe that's
why it's so hard for women.
Although I think it's
very hard for men
too, very hard,
especially for dads
to learn a new way
to be a parent.
So divorce was my greatest
fall and my greatest redemption
in the end.
Because if you
recover from divorce
with some degree
of consciousness,
and you want to make it one of
those teaching, great teachings
in your life, what
it taught me was
a lot of what I had blamed on my
husband, I began to own myself.
As I stood alone
and I saw everything
that I saw in him that
I projected onto him,
I owned myself.
And I became whole
through that process
having to stand
alone in the world
having done something and
been part of something
that I had shame
about and having
to own my shame and my
fear and my dark side,
to come into my dark side.
>> I think that's such a
remarkable thing to say
and such a courageous
thing to say.
Is there something
you did, something
you read, something you
saw, something that occurred
to you in order for you to make
that change, in order for you
to say, well, I'm responsible
here, it's not just him?
>> I would say everything
prepared me to take the journey
of divorce.
And for some people, it's
a diagnosis of cancer
or a parent dying,
whatever that fall,
the fall that you
read about in all
the great spiritual literature.
Whatever it is, that's what the
spiritual practice is for so
that you go through your
falls and you come out
resurrected and redeemed.
That's the story of
Jesus on the cross.
Whatever cross we
bear, that's to me
why we do spiritual practice.
We don't meditate or pray
to become great meditators
or the best prayer around.
We do it so that these
moments of despair
come out in the end as
moments of shining redemption
and wisdom.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think people
often are attracted
to spiritual traditions
that are really
far away from their
everyday reality
because it's a safer way
to enter spirituality
than let's say the religious
tradition of your youth
or something very American.
>> Like most seekers, Elizabeth
Lesser has pursued many
different teachers and
experimented with many
different spiritual practices
until she found the one that
worked for her.
They say practice makes perfect.
Of course, with a
spiritual practice,
the goal is never perfection,
only peace of mind.
>> So for me, my great spiritual
practice that I love and rely
on is meditation.
All different traditions
teach meditation.
And it's up to each seeker
to decide which tradition
speaks to him or her the most.
For me, classic
Buddhist meditation
has been a great rock in
my life and a teacher.
Because to sit and meditate
and to empty yourself
of all your conceptions of
who you are, how you fail,
and how you succeed
and just to be,
just to be purely
in the moment is
a form of fall and redemption
every day in your practice.
>> How many people say to
you I just don't know how
to meditate?
It sounds good.
And I want to do it.
But I just don't know how.
So many people say it to me.
Do a lot say it to you?
>> Yeah, or they say, like I
was with my mother recently
in a doctor's office.
She was having hypertension.
And the doctor said, do
you know how to meditate?
And she said, yeah, yeah.
My daughter teaches meditation.
And I've had some tapes.
And I've read some books.
And he said, but
do you meditate?
Well, I've read about it.
I know how to do it.
Well, but do you?
And she was caught
as most of us are.
We think because we're reading
about it that we're doing it.
And the practice of meditation
is supremely boring and very
hard because it's boring.
>> Yes, it's hard.
>> Because we're so much
used to activity and filling
the moment, and this is
about emptying the moment.
And that's hard
and scary for a lot
of people who aren't
used to just being
confronted with emptiness.
>> Once we've achieved
a spiritual practice,
I think a lot of people struggle
with how to do it on a daily
basis.
A lot of times, it's just
been Sunday at church
for example or just those
moments we meditate.
How do you keep it going?
I guess that's the
best way to put it.
How do you maintain it?
>> I live in a community of my
friends, our fellow seekers.
And I-- it's important to me
that I have people in my life
whom I can discuss things
of spiritual nature.
And they're there for me.
And they understand.
So having some sense of
community is important.
How do you find that?
Maybe you join a yoga class.
Maybe you do join some kind of
congregation of an organized
religion.
And you pick your friends.
You seek out like-minded people.
The other is to have a practice,
to have a spiritual discipline,
and to learn it from--
either from books-- although
a living teacher to me
at workshops or retreat centers
or churches or Buddhist centers
is important-- to
learn a practice,
meaning a 20-minute meditation
practice where you sit down
every morning before
you go to work.
And you watch your breath.
And you get in touch
with your body.
And you calm and clear your
mind and open your mind
to the vastness of experience.
And no, no, I'm not just this
little person sitting here.
I'm part of some large,
meaningful universe.
That's what a practice does.
>> I'd like to talk a little bit
about teachers because I think
a lot of people on a spiritual
path are quite disillusioned
because they have found
teachers who are not authentic.
What do you do in
a case like that?
>> It's such a good question
and such a difficult subject.
I've had several important
teachers in my life.
I've been around hundreds of
teachers at Omega Institute.
And I've observed
them from the most
inauthentic to the most just
treasures of human beings.
My main teachers have
all disappointed me
when I hold them up to this
level of since they are
such extraordinary
teachers, their lives
therefore must be exemplary.
That isn't always the equation.
So for example, my
teacher Chogyam Trungpa,
the great Tibetan teacher who
ended up dying an alcoholic
and was a wild
character, his wisdom,
his books remain to me some of
the most profound books written
in the 20th century
about the spiritual life.
So how is it that this man
who was such a fine teacher--
and he was, I learned
so much from him--
had a lot of trouble in life?
And there's a sign at the
Esalen Institute in California
that says, "We teach what
we most need to learn,
and we are our worst students."
And I think many teachers
are great at what
they teach because their
own lives are hard.
And they need to learn
it more than anyone else.
And they are wounded healers.
So if authenticity means the
teacher is perfect, good luck.
You'll never find a teacher
because most human beings
aren't perfect.
If authenticity means your
teacher's greatest desire is
for you to awaken, they're
not after your money,
they're not after
your adoration,
they're not power tripping,
they're in it with you,
and they're a few
steps ahead of you,
that to me is authenticity.
>> Along the way, you must have
been disillusioned by more than
one teacher who you thought
was just magnificent.
How did you deal with that?
>> Well, different
times different ways.
But I would say when I
add it all up together,
great teachings came from my
disillusionment with teachers.
>> And were you hurt?
Were there any times when
you thought, oh, god,
that hurts me so much
that he's that way?
>> Yeah, definitely.
>> Disappointed?
>> Disappointed.
>> Angry?
>> Confused, angry.
There's a great
saying in Buddhism.
"When you meet the Buddha
on the road, kill him."
It's a zen saying.
And people are like, what?
Kill him, the teacher?
What?
And what it means
is that when you
are ready to assume the
qualities of a teacher
in yourself and stop projecting
wisdom onto someone else, then
you kill the need for a teacher.
I still have teachers, of
course, and people I admire.
But the point of studying with
a teacher is to become wise.
It's not to become that
teacher's disciple.
The point of reading
the great books,
going to church,
having a teacher
is so that you will ultimately
embody that wisdom yourself.
Of course, right?
Why else would we do it?
Why else would we study
with this man or woman
if not to want to
become like that person?
That person is our model.
So part of the
disillusionment process
is taking it on yourself.
OK, I'm going to be that way.
I'm not going to
make that person
have to always be that way.
Let's see how hard it is for
me to always be kind, always
be wise, always have my
ego in the right place.
I'm going to take it on now.
And it often, hopefully,
the lucky among us,
it happens like this.
You've learned a lot.
You're ready.
The disillusionment
comes at a good time
when you're ready to
take it on yourself.
But that isn't always the case.
There are some
students who are really
abused by teachers,
the guru who will
sleep with women disciples.
That's a wounding,
wounding experience.
I didn't have
experiences like that.
So I don't want to belittle how
difficult it is to be deeply
disillusioned by a teacher.
>> So those are part of
the points that we look
for in a good teacher,
someone who's happy,
someone who has joy
in his or her life?
>> That's right and someone
who when they aren't happy
doesn't try to hide it,
doesn't have a holier than thou
attitude that my life is always
wonderful because I meditate
and because I commune
with the cosmos.
Therefore, all my
problems have disappeared.
People who pretend
that I don't feel
are doing a service
to their students
because then the goal
looks unattainable.
And that's not the truth.
The truth about life is yes,
as you progress spiritually,
life gets easier.
But then your father dies.
Then your friend gets cancer.
Then your children
go to college.
That doesn't mean
you're going to sail
through those transitions
with no problem.
You're going to have tools to
help you get them through them.
But you're going to feel.
>> How does one take all that
one learns on a spiritual
journey and then put it out
there in the consciousness
of the world?
>> It's a good thing
to think about.
Because if one's
spiritual journey
is only about one's own
happiness, it's only one half
of the journey.
So I would say the first
way about reaching out
to the world is to heal, to
take the path of inner healing.
And at some point,
it naturally leads
toward wanting to bring
it out in the world.
And if it doesn't,
that's a good sign
that it's not working
because a spiritual being is
a happy being.
And a happy being delights
in the happiness of others.
A happy being is not jealous
or envious or covetous.
A happy person wants
other people to be happy.
And so when one's desire to help
other people or save the planet
comes from an understanding
that life is good,
then that generosity in the
world is real and sustainable.
And it's always
important, though, to keep
in one's mind on
the spiritual path
that I want to be in
service to other people
and to the planet, that the
point of this, the end of this
is to be a healer in the world
and to be a lover in the world
and not to just keep
it about me, me, me.
>> We were going to talk
about stress too a little bit.
>> Yes, stress.
>> I know you have looked
at it inside and out.
How do we deal with it?
>> Some of stress management is
actually looking at your life
and saying, what am I doing?
Why am I doing all this stuff?
If I'm after peace of mind,
happiness, good relationships,
and a sense of freedom, and a
sense of joy in everyday life,
is all the activity
adding up to that?
And if it's not, there's
just so many hours in the day
and so many people in our
life that we can attend to.
Part of the spiritual
life is simplifying.
And I-- and people don't
always want to hear that.
>> Well, I think it's, again,
it's the first step they have
to take.
It's like intending to
clean out your closet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Life is a lot
more scattered now.
If you ask people
what's missing the most,
it's a sense of community.
It's a sense of belonging.
It's a way to know
like-minded people.
It's a way to slow
down, take stock
of what does my life mean?
Is it just work, home, gym,
this treadmill we're on?
And the world needs
that tremendously now.
>> As Elizabeth Lesser knows
from her own experience,
a spiritual path is riddled
with obstacles and roadblocks.
And no matter how
committed you are,
you're still going to get
lost every now and then.
Elizabeth, when do we know when
we've made spiritual progress?
>> We're always making
spiritual progress.
We're always-- spirituality
is like the horizon.
It's always in front of us.
So we don't ever quite totally
arrive at Spirit Station
and get off and live bliss.
But for me, signs of
progress are in my own life.
And I reached a point in
my own path in progress
where instead of
being mostly kind
of confused and
depressed and anxious all
the time with little spices of
happiness every now and then
to being pretty much happy
all the time with bouts
of depression and anger and--
>> Blue moments.
In my life, it
took a lot of work.
Some people may be
born more that way.
But I certainly wasn't.
And I don't think
many, many people are.
>> Does that mean that crossing
over into the landscape
of happiness, if we're going
to talk in that language,
was one of the more difficult
things for you to do?
>> Yeah, and let me qualify what
I mean by happy because often,
this new spirituality is
accused of being this sort
of narcissistic pursuit
of personal happiness
at the exclusion of any kind
of giving to the world or other
people.
Happiness to me is a sense of
joy in whatever I do in life.
So if it's being a
mother, and therefore--
I've raised three sons.
And for a large
chunk of those years,
I think I missed every movie
that came out and never went
on vacations because I really
gave myself to mothering.
So if you give yourself to
something that's difficult,
can you find joy in it?
Happiness isn't
just like running
after the elusive next
new thing to get better,
cool place to go.
It's fully embracing what
your life is in that moment.
So that's what I
mean by happiness,
a sense of gratitude, a sense
of connection with other people,
and a sense of just--
I have this postcard
on my refrigerator
that's a woman standing
looking at the ice cubes
in the freezer saying, oh my
god, perfect ice cubes again.
That sense of like
life is amazing,
life is a miracle without
being a sap about it.
But that's what I
mean by happiness,
the ice cubes making you happy.
>> Exactly.
>> So yes, it was a struggle
and a journey for me to arrive
there.
>> I'd be interested to know
how you came to that conclusion
because I think it's important
once again to identify
the problem.
And I think there are men and
women watching this broadcast
right now who will
say, that's it.
I'm not happy.
What do I do about that?
Because identifying
it is one thing.
Taking the step towards
happiness is another.
>> A big, unglamorous step is
first of all understanding that
the landscape of the heart,
the landscape of the emotions--
>> Which is where
happiness would be found.
>> Which is one place
where happiness is found.
Because it also is
found in our bodies,
the landscape of the
body, physical healing.
And it's found in the
landscape of the soul, which
is the landscape
where we identify
with something
greater than ourselves
and an eternity to life.
But the landscape of
relationships and daily life
is very much the landscape of
the heart and the emotions.
If we shut down to
any of the emotions
in the landscape of the heart,
let's say sadness or fear,
and if we don't want to
deal with it, I'm not sad,
I'm not afraid, I'm not weak--
that's a big one--
I'm fine, and we
keep going around it
and don't want to go through
either painful memories
or the fact that our
life isn't working,
we're not happy with our mate,
let's say, or ourself as a--
at work, our profession
isn't meaningful.
If we just want to
keep going around it
and come home and have a
few drinks so we don't have
to deal or watch television
instead of really confronting
that other person in our
life in a healthy way,
if we shut down
to those emotions
and then try to pursue
happiness, doesn't work.
The open heart feels everything.
An open heart feels pain.
It feels other
people's pain so you
can no longer act like a jerk
and not know what you're doing.
An open heart is very sensitive.
It feels everything.
So the first step
in being happy is
being willing to feel sad as
strange as that may sound.
They are hand in glove.
You can't have one
without the other.
There's something
beautiful about our ability
to feel sadness and grief.
And when you go through
a time of great loss
in life, through the death
of someone or breaking
off a relationship, if you don't
let yourself feel the grief
and you harden around
it, you are shutting down
the possibility toward
true freedom and happiness.
So the ability to feel
grief and to feel sadness
is the first step toward
feeling happiness.
>> In your book, one of the
things that brings clarity
to it is that you allow us
to walk through landscapes,
the landscape of the heart,
the landscape of the soul.
You also talk a great
deal about therapy.
Do people ever use
a spiritual practice
in order to avoid something
that would be best dealt
with in therapy?
>> Some people go into
spirituality as a way to run
away.
Sometimes, calm only comes
after other ways of being.
To be calm all the time doesn't
mean we are a spiritual person.
If you are suffering abuse,
let's say, being calm
wouldn't necessarily
be the most courageous
and adventurous and spiritual
way to deal with a situation.
So some people bypass life
by taking on what they
call a spiritual way of being.
And there's nothing more to me
frustrating to be with someone
who has a happy face smile
plastered on everything in life
and is using
miracles and a sense
of being saved by
God to not deal.
And we've all seen
people who are--
call themselves spiritual
meditators, go to workshops.
Meanwhile, their kids aren't
being cared for correctly
or their lives are
just not shining
examples of what
I would consider
to be spiritual behavior.
We always could feel awake
to the splendor of life.
But things often are
standing in the way.
Our history, our
psychological history,
the way we were
treated as children,
the way our life has
shaped up is a roadblock.
And until we go and unravel
our defense mechanisms
toward the rapture
of life, we're stuck.
And if we just plaster
a spiritual discipline
on top of the roadblocks, we're
not going to get anywhere.
We're just going to
kind of go around
where we have to go through.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It has been a long and
sometimes challenging journey
for Elizabeth Lesser.
She survived a divorce,
raised three children,
helped create the
Omega Institute,
and then in writing "The New
American Spirituality" has
given each of us a gift,
our own personal guide
to a practical and
meaningful spiritual life.
What is your life
like now, Elizabeth?
Because I get the impression
that the reason you wrote
this book was that life
was difficult. And then
you shared that journey with us.
Is life easier now?
Is it less difficult for you?
>> Yeah, profoundly.
And I think it's a combination
of older and wiser, years
of working on myself through
meditation and psychotherapy,
the fact that my three children
are grown up and in college
and doing well.
And raising kids is
a daily difficulty
and takes a lot of energy.
And my-- I have--
my second marriage is built
on the foundation of both
of our spiritual
work, which is a joy
to share the journey
with one's mate,
and bearing the fruits of
having gone through the journey.
>> Was the book difficult
for you to write?
Was it a hard task?
>> When I was writing the book,
my father died in the middle
of writing the book.
So I was in the
rhythm of writing.
And I was able to
use writing to get me
through the grief
of losing my father.
And I think that was
a great boon to me
to be able to write it down.
>> Particularly since I know
your father was as difficult
a man as he was a lovable man.
>> Yes.
Yes, he was.
And I was able to use
writing about my feelings.
When a parent dies or when
someone you love dies,
your whole life with
them is churned up.
It's cultivated again.
So you get to relive.
I mean, I've relived
some aspects of my life
with my father that
I had forgotten.
Writing about it and just
letting myself really
feel it was very healing.
I felt I was able to
really go through it.
>> Along the way, one of
the friends you met is a man
by the name of Baba Olatunji
who was so helpful to you when
your father died.
>> When my father died, I asked
Baba, how should I do this?
How can I create a ceremony
that will speak to everyone?
And he said, well,
in my village,
every person had a song.
And when they passed,
we sing the song.
And that escorts their
spirit into the other world.
What was your father's song?
And sure enough,
when it came time
in the memorial service for
me to give my little speech,
I said, and now I'm going
to sing my father's song.
Does anybody know what
my father's song is?
And all my sisters,
my three sisters,
chimed in right on beat.
They knew nothing about it.
But they chimed right in.
[VOCALIZING] So we
sang that for a while
and escorted his spirit on.
>> It's interesting how many
people in my peer group today
are asking questions
about death.
All of a sudden,
they're aware of it.
They're afraid of it.
They have questions about it.
Is that answerable these days?
>> If we're looking for an
answer like this is where we go
when we die, it's not
answerable because I think
it's the ultimate mystery.
And what the
spiritual path does is
it gives you the ability to
relax into that mystery instead
of closing down to it
out of fear or just
out of not knowing what to
do with such an unknown.
To be able to relax one's
idea of what it might be like
and just to stand before
it with a sense of openness
and reverence and awe makes
life much more wonderful.
And how to practice that so
that you can be open to death
is first of all,
it's such a shame
that people die now in
hospitals or in nursing homes.
And we don't get to be
with people when they die.
I have been with several
people as they die and take
their last breath.
And I can tell you, if
anything has helped me
with my anxiety
about dying, it's
being with people as they die.
>> You were with your
best friend when she died.
>> Of leukemia.
And that was my first--
the first person
I was with as she died.
And I felt I went a little
way with her into whatever
the next world is.
And it gave me a
sense of confidence
in the eternity of the soul.
And since then, I've been
with other people as they die.
And I recommend it highly.
>> It's greatly comforting
to hear you say that,
to hear you say, it gave
me a sense of confidence.
Because when someone is
with someone when they die,
we are all afraid that the
sense it will give us is sorrow.
But that's not what
you experienced,
even though she was your
best friend, someone
you loved for years.
>> Yeah, I sensed her
rejoining the undivided sense
of consciousness.
I sensed her being freed
from the condensed life
we live in the body.
And it's hard to wrap
words around what I sensed.
And it begins to sound
like something contrived.
But in moments of
meditation, and when
I am with people who
are dying, or when
I'm listening to
great gospel music
or taking a walk in nature, and
I feel that sense of oneness
with everything that is, that's
when my resistance to death
melts.
And I know that what
is so now is so forever
and that I'm just part
of an evolving life.
>> Before I let you go, I'd
like to talk a little bit about
the Omega Institute.
How did that begin?
>> Omega began an idea in
a few young people's minds.
We were-- one of
us was a doctor.
We were in education.
We were in spirituality.
And we were a little
ahead of the wave.
We didn't really
know it at the time.
We were just interested
in these things, which
by now are household
words in America-- yoga,
holistic health, meditation.
These were very out there
subjects in those days.
We started very small,
couple of hundred people.
We rented a prep school
in upstate New York,
had about four or five teachers.
But every year, it surprised
us more than anyone what
the attendance was like.
There was a tremendous
response and hunger.
We would bring teachers like
Elisabeth Kubler-Ross, who
was bringing the
subject of death
and dying into medical schools.
No one knew who she was.
But we'd read a book.
And we'd bring her.
And then it began to catch
on more in the culture.
Last year, 20,000 people came
to Omega in our summer season.
So we have grown so fast
and learned on our way
how to run an organization
as large as we are now.
>> When you began your serious
spiritual journey, it was what,
25, 30 years ago?
Well, it actually started
when you were a little girl.
But as a grown-up, there
must have been so many times
when you were the only
woman in the room.
It had to have not been easy
and sometimes infuriating.
>> It was so
infuriating at times.
I would want to get
on top of the table
and just beat my chest and wail.
And I remember once
seeing a documentary
about this Brazilian tribe.
And their habitat
was being encroached
upon by an oil company.
And they marched into
the capital city.
And the men went with
their spears and war paint.
And they were like fighting
with the officials.
And the women took their hands.
And they circled all the men.
And they started crying.
And they started wailing.
And tears were streaming
down their cheeks.
And everyone stopped
and looked at them.
And the head of the tribe said,
the women are speaking for us.
You are hurting us.
And I often at work
would feel the truth.
And I would want to express
it the way I know how to.
>> Yes.
Many years ago when you
began the Omega Institute,
you had great
insight as to where
we were going as a nation
on a spiritual path.
As we sit here now and you look
forward, where are we headed?
What difference will all
this have made in our future?
>> Well, what I hold as so
hopeful about the coming years,
what I love the most about what
I see happening in America,
is that we are
becoming one people,
that we are learning to
truly appreciate each race,
each religion, each sex, as
part of this necklace that is
the world, not that we all
are going to become the same--
God help us.
That's why I pray that the
mauling of America stops
and that we do maintain some of
the diversity around the world.
But what brings me hope is
our becoming one people.
And to me, it's a metaphor
for becoming unified
within and without
as the many voices
that occupy our internal selves,
our childhood, our training,
becomes one, and we become
a whole strong person,
and we heal.
I also see it happening outside
where all the different voices
in America are
becoming one voice,
maintaining their
beautiful individuality
and becoming unified.
And I think spiritually, you can
see that in religions accepting
each other.
But beyond religion, I
think the unity of mankind
is a spiritual endeavor.
>> It's certainly gratifying to
see that kind of hopefulness,
isn't it?
>> Yes.
We need hope.
Hope is a good
emotion to cultivate.
>> Yes.
Thank you, Elizabeth Lesser.
Thank you so much.
>> You're welcome.
[MUSIC PLAYING]